despite adopting an 'anti-corruption law' in 2010, corruption prevails throughout the country. some critics of the government have been arrested for allegedly spreading fake news about the covid-19 pandemic in cambodia. hinduism has left little trace beyond the magical practices of tantricism and a host of hindu gods now assimilated into the spirit world. there is also a french-language newspaper and some tv channels are available in french. after the 2013 cambodian general election, allegations of voter fraud from opposition party cambodia national rescue party led to widespread anti-government protests that continued into the following year. the credit bureau further increases the transparency and stability within the cambodian banking sector as all banks and microfinance companies are now required by law to report accurate facts and figures relating to loan performance in the country. in 2010, the royal cambodian armed forces comprised about 102,000 active personnel. other key habitats include the evergreen and dry dipterocarp forests of mondolkiri province, protected by keo seima wildlife sanctuary, phnom prich wildlife sanctuary, and srepok wildlife sanctuary, as well as ratanakiri province, and the cardamom mountains ecosystem, including preah monivong national park, botum-sakor national park, and the phnom aural wildlife sanctuary and phnom samkos wildlife sanctuary. political culture general hun manet succeeded his father hun sen as prime minister in august 2023. food stands in siem reap oil and natural gas deposits found beneath cambodia's territorial waters in 2005 yield great potential but remain mostly untapped, due in part to territorial disputes with thailand. sihanouk international airport, is in the coastal city of sihanoukville. during the 15-day festival, people offer prayers and food to the spirits of their dead relatives. iron was worked by about 500 bc, with supporting evidence coming from the khorat plateau, in what later is thailand. peace efforts began in paris in 1989 under the state of cambodia, culminating 2 years later in october 1991 in a paris comprehensive peace settlement. a july 2023 human rights watch report showed numerous and significant election fraud and vote tampering in the june 2022 commune elections. ' in april 2016 cambodia's national assembly has adopted a law on trade unions. agriculture remains the dominant economic sector, with growth in textiles, construction, garments, and tourism leading to increased foreign investment and international trade. the plan makes provision for establishing a science and technology foundation to promote industrial innovation, with a particular focus on agriculture, primary industry and icts. a chinese company with the support of the people's liberation army built a deep-water seaport along 90 km stretch of cambodian coastline of the gulf of thailand in koh kong province; the port is sufficiently deep to be used by cruise ships, bulk carriers or warships. in public sihanouk refuted the right of the u. in the province with worst health indicators, ratanakiri, 22. its quality varies widely and it is often infused with fruits or medicinal herbs. hun sen was succeeded by his son hun manet as prime minister in august 2023 following an election that was deemed by independent and foreign media and politicians to be neither free nor fair. cambodia, officially the kingdom of cambodia, is a country in southeast asia on the indochinese peninsula. cambodia is highly vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change and it is advised that the country focuses more on developing renewable energy as part of climate change mitigation measures. the throne became vacant in 1941 with the death of monivong, sisowath's son, and france passed over monivong's son, monireth, feeling he was too independently minded. known formally as robam preah reach troap it is set to the music of a pinpeat ensemble accompanied by a vocal chorus. due to this shift, mostly english is now used in cambodia's international relationships, and it has replaced french both on cambodia's stamps and, since 2002, on cambodian currency. mahayana buddhism is the religion of the majority of chinese and vietnamese in cambodia. in august 2014, the tribunal sentenced khieu samphan, the regime's 83-year-old former head of state, and nuon chea, its 88-year-old chief ideologue, to life in prison on war crimes charges for their role in the country's terror period in the 1970s. boat racing during bon om touk bon om touk , the annual boat rowing contest, is the most attended cambodian national festival. phnom penh international airport is the busiest airport in cambodia. the cambodian education system is heavily decentralised, with three levels of government, central, provincial, and district – responsible for its management. the lyrics usually have moral or religious theme. the cpp won every seat in the national assembly without major opposition, effectively solidifying de facto one-party rule in the country. making cambodia's garment factories safer overall f. administrative divisions main article: administrative divisions of cambodia the autonomous municipality and provinces of cambodia are first-level administrative divisions. the minister of national defense is general tea banh. cambodia has established diplomatic relations with numerous countries; the government reports twenty embassies in the country including many of its asian neighbours and those of important players during the paris peace negotiations, including the us, australia, canada, china, the european union , japan, and russia. cambodia was ranked 103rd in the global innovation index in 2024. the vietnam war extended into the country in 1965 via the ho chi minh and sihanouk trails. phnom penh phnom penh siem reap siem reap 1 phnom penh – 2,281,951 11 chbar mon kampong speu 50,359 battambang battambang sisophon sisophon 2 siem reap siem reap 245,494 12 bavet svay rieng 43,783 3 battambang battambang 119,251 13 doun kaev takéo 43,402 4 sisophon banteay meanchey 99,019 14 svay rieng svay rieng 41,424 5 poipet banteay meanchey 98,934 15 kampong chhnang kampong chhnang 41,080 6 ta khmau kandal 75,629 16 kampong cham kampong cham 38,365 7 sihanoukville preah sihanouk 73,036 17 pailin pailin 37,393 8 samraong oddar meanchey 70,944 18 prey veng prey veng 36,254 9 pursat pursat 58,355 19 suong tboung khmum 35,054 10 stueng saen kampong thom 53,118 20 kampot kampot 32,053 languages see also: demographics of cambodia § languages the khmer language is a member of the mon–khmer subfamily of the austroasiatic language group. fear of renewed political instability and corruption within the government discourage foreign investment and delay foreign aid, although there has been significant aid from bilateral and multilateral donors. demonstrators were injured and killed in phnom penh where a reported 20,000 protesters gathered, with some clashing with riot police. international visitor arrivals in 2018 topped six million, a ten-fold increase since the beginning of the 21st century. waterfall at phnom kulen prey lang forest the rate of deforestation in cambodia is one of the highest in the world and it is often perceived as the most destructive, singular environmental issue in the country. the king urged his followers to help in overthrowing this government, hastening the onset of civil war. in 2018, they handled a record of 10 million passengers. kâmpŭchéa is the shortened alternative to the country's official name in khmer ព្រះរាជាណាចក្រកម្ពុជា and कम्बोज , referring to the descendants of kambu. only men aged 20 to 60 were counted, as its purpose was for the collection of taxes. rural coastal populations are particularly at risk. he was enthroned in phnom penh on 29 october 2004. the city could have supported a population of up to 1 million people. cambodia is a member of the united nations, asean, the rcep, the east asia summit, the wto, the non-aligned movement and la francophonie, and a dialogue partner of the shanghai cooperation organisation. history main article: history of cambodia prehistory main article: early history of cambodia glazed stoneware dating back to the 12th century there exists evidence for a pleistocene human occupation of what later is cambodia, which includes quartz and quartzite pebble tools found in terraces along the mekong river, in stung treng and kratié provinces, and in kampot province. the secretaries of state for defense are chay saing yun and por bun sreu. choeung ek, a known site of mass grave for genocide victims during the khmer rouge era estimates as to how many people were killed by the khmer rouge regime range from approximately 1 to 3 million; a cited figure is 2 million. typically faster-paced than classical dance, folk dances display themes of the "common person" such as love, comedy or warding off evil spirits. in the first half of 2013, the garment industry reported exports worth $1. a us state department report says "forces under hun sen and the cambodian people's party have committed frequent and large-scale abuses, including extrajudicial killings and torture, with impunity". the southern coastal region adjoining the gulf of thailand is a narrow lowland strip, heavily wooded and sparsely populated, which is isolated from the central plain by the southwestern highlands. for more than 2,000 years, what was to become cambodia absorbed influences from india, passing them on to other southeast asian civilisations that later became thailand and laos. the name cambodia is used most often in the western world while kampuchea is more widely used in the eastern world. the angkor wat historical park in siem reap province, the beaches in sihanoukville, the capital city phnom penh, and cambodia's 150 casinos are the main attractions for foreign tourists. chinese cambodians are approximately 0. cambodia has two distinct seasons. khmer culture, as developed and spread by the khmer empire, has distinctive styles of dance, architecture, and sculpture, which have been exchanged with neighbouring laos and thailand throughout history. cambodia's reputation as a safe destination for tourism has been hindered by civil and political unrest and several high-profile examples of serious crime committed against tourists visiting the kingdom. "cyclo" or cycle rickshaws were popular in 1990s but are increasingly replaced by remorques and rickshaws imported from india. the cambodian people's party is the sole dominant-party in cambodia. the 2010 anti-corruption law provided no protection to whistle-blowers, and whistle-blowers can be jailed for up to 6 months if they report corruption that cannot be proven. according to some estimates, unexploded land mines have been responsible for over 60,000 civilian deaths and thousands more maimed or injured since 1970. the exact origins of khmer classical dance are disputed. at a 1. the dengue fever rock and roll band features a cambodian female singer and back-up band from california. on 28 march a press conference was held and sihanouk appealed to the international media: "i appeal to you to publicise abroad this very clear stand of cambodia—that is, i will, in any case, oppose all bombings on cambodian territory under whatever pretext. cambodia has three commercial airports. pol pot was determined to keep his power and disenfranchise any enemies or potential threats, and thus increased his violent and aggressive actions against his people. it spans an area of 181,035 square kilometres , and has a population of about 17 million. trains are again running to and from the cambodian capital and popular destinations in the south. in 802 ad, jayavarman ii declared himself king, uniting the warring khmer princes of chenla under the name "kambuja". following the 2024 senate election, hun sen became president of the senate, a role which gives him the power to sign off on laws in the king's absence. the un now designates it a least developed country. cambodia and china have cultivated ties in the 2010s. simultaneous attacks around the perimeter of phnom penh pinned down republican forces, while other cpk units overran fire bases controlling the vital lower mekong resupply route. to attract more investment in renewable energy, the government could improve renewable energy governance, adopt clear targets, develop an effective regulatory framework, improve project bankability and facilitate market entry for international investors. journalists covering a protest over disputed election results in phnom penh on 22 september 2013 say they were deliberately attacked by police and men in plain clothes, with slingshots and stun guns. ranariddh was ousted and fled to paris while other opponents of hun sen were arrested, tortured, and some summarily executed. in 2010, the ministry of education, youth and sports approved a policy on research development in the education sector. instead, norodom sihanouk, a maternal grandson of king sisowath was enthroned. burials testify to improvement of food availability and trade, and the existence of a social structure and labour organization. in cambodia, some iron age settlements were found beneath baksei chamkrong and other angkorian temples while circular earthworks were discovered at the site of lovea kilometres north-west of angkor. traditionally, education in cambodia was offered by the wats , thus providing education exclusively for the male population. archaeological records for the period between the holocene and iron age remain equally limited. municipalities and districts are the second-level administrative divisions of cambodia. the prime minister and the ministerial appointees exercise executive power. the cambodia national rescue party was dissolved ahead of the 2018 cambodian general election and the ruling cambodian people's party also enacted tighter curbs on mass media. in 2007 an international team of researchers using satellite photographs and other modern techniques concluded that angkor had been the largest pre-industrial city in the world with an urban sprawl of 2,980 square kilometres. according to the international development research center and the united nations, cambodia is considered southeast asia's most vulnerable country to the effects of climate change, alongside the philippines. the number of reported landmine casualties has sharply decreased, from 800 in 2005 to 111 in 2013. phnom penh, at the junction of the bassac, the mekong, and the tonle sap rivers, is the only river port capable of receiving 8,000-ton ships during the wet season and 5,000-ton ships during the dry season. creating a "level playing field" for labour across garment sector g. by 1978, due to the khmer rouge regime, the entire legal system was eradicated. among the cambodian population aged over 65, the female to male ratio is 1. a map of indochina in 1760 the hill tribe people were "hunted incessantly and carried off as slaves by the siamese , the annamites , and the cambodians". the most distinctive geographical feature is the inundations of the tonle sap, measuring about 2,590 square kilometres during the dry season and expanding to about 24,605 square kilometres during the rainy season. the election was won by funcinpec led by sihanouk's son ranariddh in a hung parliament. the quantity of souvenirs that are produced is not sufficient to face the increasing number of tourists and a majority of products sold to the tourists on the markets are imported from china, thailand, and vietnam. te krolap is a strong tea, made by putting water and a mass of tea leaves into a small glass, placing a saucer on top, and turning the whole thing upside down to brew. in addition to political oppression, the cambodian government has been accused of corruption in the sale of vast areas of land to foreign investors resulting in the eviction of thousands of villagers as well as taking bribes in exchange for grants to exploit cambodia's oil wealth and mineral resources. 4 per 100,000 population. the 2013 election results were disputed by the opposition, leading to demonstrations in the capital. angkor wat is the best-preserved example of khmer architecture from the angkorian era along with hundreds of other temples that have been discovered in and around the region. cambodia's landscape is characterised by a low-lying central plain that is surrounded by uplands and low mountains and includes the tonle sap and the upper reaches of the mekong river delta. education main article: education in cambodia the ministry of education, youth and sports is responsible for establishing national policies and guidelines for education in cambodia. cambodia is a member of the united nations, the world bank, and the international monetary fund. education has also suffered setbacks from child labour, a study by kim reports that most employed children in cambodia are enrolled in school but their employment is associated with late school entry, negative impacts on their learning outcomes, and increased drop out rates. 4 billion in 2018, accounting for almost ten per cent of the kingdom's gross national product. it has a 443-kilometre coastline along the gulf of thailand. prime minister hun sen vowed to rule until he turned 74. nva units overran cambodian army positions while the communist party of kampuchea expanded their attacks on lines of communication. " the rich fisheries of tonle sap, the largest freshwater lake in southeast asia, largely supply the impoverished country's protein. after king norodom's death in 1904, france manipulated the choice of king and sisowath, norodom's brother, was placed on the throne. 39% 2004 12,800,000 +1. demographics main article: demographics of cambodia historical population year pop. the country experiences the heaviest precipitation from september to october with the driest period occurring from january to february. bribes are often demanded from companies operating in cambodia when obtaining licences and permits, such as construction-related permits. lawyers did not reappear until 1995 when the bar association of the kingdom of cambodia was created. 1962 5,728,771 — 1980 6,600,000 +0. a new national environmental strategy and action plan for cambodia is to be implemented from late 2016 to 2023 and contains new ideas for how to incite a green and environmentally sustainable growth for the country. two of cambodia's most acclaimed universities are based in phnom penh. 6 metres and another 282 kilometres navigable to craft drawing 1. there are also a growing number of microbreweries in phnom penh and siem reap. in response to the north vietnamese invasion, us president richard nixon announced that us and south vietnamese ground forces had entered cambodia in a campaign aimed at destroying nva base areas in cambodia. 6 the french protectorate of cambodia condudcted its first official census in 1921. senators serve six-year terms. lack of a clear distinction between the courts and the executive branch of government also makes for a deep politicisation of the judicial system. legal profession the cambodian legal profession was established in 1932. documents uncovered from the soviet archives after 1991 reveal that the north vietnamese attempt to overrun cambodia in 1970 was launched at the explicit request of the khmer rouge and negotiated by pol pot's then second in command, nuon chea. the institute of foreign languages of the royal university of phnom penh the 2019 cambodian census estimated that 88. this marked the beginning of the khmer empire. the cpp currently commands 120 of the 125 seats in the national assembly and 55 of 62 seats in the senate. techo international airport, intended to replace the existing phnom penh international airport as the city's main airport, is currently under construction. 0 children in 2000. the refusal of vietnam to withdraw from cambodia led to economic sanctions. while constitutionally a multi-party state, cpp dominates the political system and dissolved its main opposition party in 2017, making it a de facto one-party state. cambodia has two rail lines, totalling about 612 kilometres of single, one-metre gauge track. in the july 2023 election, the ruling cambodian people's party easily won by a landslide in a flawed election, after the disqualification of cambodia's most important opposition, candlelight party. besides phom penh and angkor wat, other tourist destinations include sihanoukville in the southwest which has several popular beaches and battambang in the northwest, both of which are popular stops for backpackers who make up a significant portion of visitors to cambodia. ' cambodia signed the un treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons. the religion spread and eventually displaced hinduism and mahayana buddhism as the popular religion of angkor; it was not the official state religion until 1295 when indravarman iii took power. this era gave rise to the term killing fields, and the prison tuol sleng became known for its history of mass killing. culture main articles: culture of cambodia and preah ko preah keo the 19th-century illustration tale of vorvong & sorvong various factors contribute to the cambodian culture including theravada buddhism, hinduism, french colonialism, angkorian culture, and modern globalization. rice wine is a popular alcoholic drink. royal dances like the apsara dance are icons of the cambodian culture as are the mahori ensembles that accompany them. 9% of children die before age five. an event in prehistory was the penetration of the first rice farmers from the north, which began in the third millennium bc. western sports such as basketball, volleyball, bodybuilding, field hockey, rugby union, golf, and baseball are gaining popularity. almost all cham in cambodia are muslims. "those fish are so important for their livelihoods, both economically and nutritionally", said gordon holtgrieve, a professor at the university of washington; he points out that none of the dams that are either built or being built on the mekong river "are pointing at good outcomes for the fisheries". the warning comes after a june 2022 lawsuit filed by the national election committee against the party's deputy president, son chhay, accusing him of defamation by speaking out against electoral fraud by the cpp. the north vietnamese and viet cong forces, desperate to retain their sanctuaries and supply lines from north vietnam, launched armed attacks on the new government. fertility is highest in mondol kiri and rattanak kiri provinces, where women have an average of 4. hun sen was a former khmer rouge commander who was originally installed by the vietnamese and, after the vietnamese left the country, maintains his strong man position by violence and oppression when deemed necessary. 8 metres. 3 children per woman in rural areas. land has been confiscated from hundreds of thousands of cambodians over more than a decade for the purpose of self-enrichment and maintaining power of various groups of special interests. cambodia also hosted the ganefo games in 1966 and recently, the sea games in 2023. the un withdrew after the 1993 cambodian general election, decided by around 90% of registered voters. in the 1980s it was an important primary commodity, second only to rice, and one of the country's few sources of foreign exchange. tra leaf books record legends of the khmer people, the ramayana, the origin of buddhism and other prayer books. in the 15th century, it began a decline in power until, in 1863, it became the french protectorate of cambodia. male youth age have a literacy rate of 89% compared to 86% for females. based on the economist, imf: annual average gdp growth for the period 2001–2010 was 7. etymology main article: names of cambodia the kingdom of cambodia is the official english name of the country. after the japanese occupation of cambodia during the second world war, it gained independence in 1953. although the vietnamese language has been determined to be a mon–khmer language, there are very few cultural connections between the two peoples because the early khmers were influenced by the indian cultural sphere while the vietnamese are part of the chinese cultural sphere. main article: tourism in cambodia every year, nearly 2. when it is dark enough, the tea is decanted into another cup and plenty of sugar added, but no milk. the khmers historically have lived near the lower mekong river in a contiguous diagonal arc, from where modern-day thailand, laos, and cambodia meet in the northwest, all the way to the mouth of the mekong river in southeastern vietnam. the international labour organization country office for thailand, cambodia and lao pdr, has noted that the law has "several key concerns and gaps". the same message was conveyed to us president johnson's emissary chester bowles in january 1968. prehistoric evidence are the "circular earthworks" discovered in the red soils near memot and in the adjacent region of vietnam in the latter 1950s. energy main article: energy in cambodia cambodia has high potential for developing renewable energy resources. after a series of wars with neighbouring kingdoms, angkor was sacked by the ayutthaya kingdom and abandoned in 1432 because of ecological failure and infrastructure breakdown. a yai can be performed solo or by a man and woman and is often comedic in nature. rank name province pop. the khmer rouge representative to un, thiounn prasith, was retained, and he had to work in consultation with representatives of the noncommunist cambodian parties. influencing business practices through using factory data to highlight areas for improvement and being a core part of risk management strategies of international brands/buyers. cambodia is consistently listed as one of the most corrupt governments in the world. in the 1980s, keo surath, and others carried on the legacy of the classic singers, often remaking their popular songs. according to the 2016 global slavery index, an estimated 256,800 people are enslaved in modern-day cambodia, or 1. a power-sharing agreement was agreed with ranariddh and hun sen of the cambodian people's party both simultaneously being co-prime ministers after the cpp threatened to secede part of the country if power was fully transferred to funcinpec. 96% 1998 11,437,656 +3. forced land evictions by senior officials, security forces, and government-connected business leaders are commonplace in cambodia. that same year, it was estimated that there were about 100,000 sex workers in cambodia. the northeast monsoon ushers in the dry season, which lasts from november to april. dance music is composed in particular styles for social dances. cambodia has several industrial breweries, located mainly in sihanoukville province and phnom penh. the fertility rate was 4. cambodia's tourist souvenir industry employs a lot of people around the main places of interest. although seven ministries are responsible for the country's 33 public universities, the majority of these institutions come under the umbrella of the ministry of education, youth and sports. the indianised kingdom facilitated the spread of first hinduism and then buddhism to southeast asia and undertook religious infrastructural projects throughout the region. on 14 october 2004, king norodom sihamoni was selected by a special nine-member royal throne council, part of a selection process that was quickly put in place after the abdication of king norodom sihanouk a week prior. tourism this section needs to be updated. the lake is unusual: it all but disappears in the dry season and then expands massively as water flow from the mekong backs up when the rains come. most are urban dwellers, engaged primarily in commerce. pre-angkorian, angkorian, and post-angkor main articles: kingdom of funan, chenla, khmer empire, and post-angkor period angkor wat faces of bodhisattva avalokiteshvara at prasat bayon during the 3rd, 4th, and 5th centuries, the indianised states of funan and its successor, chenla, coalesced in what later is cambodia and southwestern vietnam. volleyball is by far the most popular sport in the country. disastrous flooding occurred in 2001 and again in 2002, with some degree of flooding almost every year. crime further information: crime in cambodia in 2017, cambodia had a homicide rate of 2. examples include the circle dances romvong and romkbach as well as saravan and lam leav. trains also run from phnom penh to sisophon. in 2017, cambodia's supreme court dissolved the main opposition party, cambodia national rescue party , paving the way for a return to a yet more authoritarian political system. adults that survive landmines often require amputation of one or more limbs and have to resort to begging for survival. hun sen remains the de facto ruler of cambodia through his continued leadership of the cambodian people's party. the cuisine is relatively unknown to the world compared to that of its neighbours thailand and vietnam. 65% of the population. 94% national institute of statistics: general population census of the kingdom of cambodia 2019, chapter 2, p. 5 million jobs for cambodians. nearly all provinces in cambodia are affected by climate change. on 18 august 2019, prime minister hun sen signed a directive banning the finance ministry from issuing new online gambling licenses, while operators currently holding online licenses would only be allowed to continue operating until those licenses expire. during the khmer rouge revolution, many classic and popular singers of the 1960s and 1970s were murdered, starved to death, or overwork to death by the khmer rouge. cambodia had issued over 150 such licenses before the new policy was announced. the prime minister is appointed by the king, on the advice and with the approval of the national assembly. this consisted of the khmer rouge, a royalist faction led by sihanouk, and the khmer people's national liberation front. a un-backed war crimes tribunal, the khmer rouge tribunal sought out to investigate crimes committed during the democratic kampuchea period and prosecute its leaders. the global covid-19 pandemic spread to cambodia in early 2020. in opposition to the newly created state, a government-in-exile referred to as the coalition government of democratic kampuchea was formed in 1981 from 3 factions. the term cambodia was already in use in europe as early as 1524, since antonio pigafetta cites it in his work relazione del primo viaggio intorno al mondo as camogia. after its government was able to stabilize under sen, cambodia was accepted into the association of southeast asian nations on 30 april 1999. kingdom main article: modern cambodia in 1993, the monarchy was restored with norodom sihanouk reinstated as king, and the first post-war election was coordinated by untac. under the reign of king norodom sihanouk, cambodia gained independence from france on 9 november 1953. as a result of its international relations, various charitable organisations have assisted with social, economic, and civil infrastructure needs. the worldwide fund for nature recognises six distinct terrestrial ecoregions in cambodia – the cardamom mountains rain forests, central indochina dry forest, southeast indochina dry evergreen forest, southern annamite range tropical forest, tonle sap freshwater swamp forest, and tonle sap-mekong peat swamp forest. 7% and exports at us$1. the education system in cambodia continues to face many challenges, but during the past years, there have been significant improvements, especially in terms of primary net enrolment gains, the introduction of program based-budgeting, and the development of a policy framework which helps disadvantaged children to gain access to education. they and their followers instituted the cult of the god-king and began a series of conquests that formed an empire which flourished in the area from the 9th to the 15th centuries. the introduction of a revised command structure early in 2000 was a key prelude to the reorganisation of the cambodian military. the khmer script is derived from the south indian pallava script. their function and age are still debated, and some of them possibly date from the second millennium bc. paddy field in siem reap province the national bank of cambodia is the central bank of the kingdom and provides regulatory oversight to the country's banking sector and is responsible in part for increasing the foreign direct investment in the country. according to robert d. main article: religion in cambodia theravada buddhism is the official religion of cambodia, practised by more than 95 per cent of the population with an estimated 4,392 monastery temples throughout the country. for the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership. the constitution of cambodia promulgates free compulsory education for nine years, guaranteeing the universal right to basic quality education. the vietnamese-occupied people's republic of kampuchea became the de facto government. its capital and most populous city is phnom penh. this move represented the first step towards a national approach to research and development across the university sector and the application of research for the purposes of national development. 04 female to male ratio, cambodia has the most female-biased sex ratio in the greater mekong subregion. the khmer rouge ruled the country and carried out the cambodian genocide from 1975 until 1979, when they were ousted in the cambodian–vietnamese war. this saw the defence ministry form three subordinate general departments responsible for logistics and finance, materials and technical services, and defence services under the high command headquarters. 7% making it one of the world's top ten countries with the highest annual average gdp growth. recent artistic figures include singers sinn sisamouth and ros serey sothea , who introduced new musical styles to the country. cambodia's muslim population is reported to be 80% ethnic cham. even though the country has not attracted much international investment in renewable energy by 2020, the country serves as a model to learn from for other asean countries in terms of conducting solar power auctions. seven reporters sustained minor injuries while at least two cambodian protesters were hit by slingshot projectiles and hospitalized. operation eagle pull khmer rouge rebels began using him to gain support. in cambodia, landmines and exploded ordnance alone have caused 44,630 injuries between 1979 and 2013, according to the cambodia mine/uxo victim information system. rural cambodians wear a krama scarf which is a unique aspect of cambodian clothing. on new year's day 1975, communist troops launched an offensive which, in 117 days, led to the collapse of the khmer republic. after 14 years, regular rail services between the two cities restarted recently – offering a safer option than road for travellers. cambodians drink plenty of tea, grown in mondulkiri province and around kirirom. some archaeological evidence shows communities of hunter-gatherers inhabited the region during the holocene: the most ancient archaeological discovery site in cambodia is considered to be the cave of laang spean, which belongs to the hoabinhian period. the people's republic of kampuchea was established as a pro-soviet state led by the kampuchean people's revolutionary party, a party created by the vietnamese in 1951, and led by a group of khmer rouge who had fled cambodia to avoid being purged by pol pot and ta mok. the environmental degradation also includes national parks and wildlife sanctuaries on a large scale and many endangered and endemic species are now threatened with extinction due to loss of habitats. probably the most popular dine out dish, kuyteav, is a pork broth rice noodle soup with fried garlic, scallions, green onions that may also contain various toppings such as beef balls, shrimp, pork liver or lettuce. tourism has increased steadily each year in the relatively stable period since the 1993 untac elections. fish from the mekong and tonlé sap rivers is also an important part of the diet. " nevertheless, the public pleas of sihanouk were ignored and the bombing continued. professionals, such as doctors, lawyers and teachers, were targeted. tourism employs 26% of the country's workforce, which translates into roughly 2. companies deal with extensive red tape when obtaining licenses and permits, especially construction-related permits, and the demand for and supply of bribes are commonplace in this process. 6 billion. his majesty king norodom sihamoni is the supreme commander of the royal cambodian armed forces , and the country's prime minister hun sen effectively holds the position of commander-in-chief. as of 1987, only one passenger train per week operated between phnom penh and battambang but a us$141 million project, funded mostly by the asian development bank, has been started to revitalise the languishing rail system that will " cambodia with major industrial and logistics centers in bangkok and ho chi minh city". the majority of khmer architecture, 95% of cambodia's buddhist temples, were destroyed. cambodian popular music is performed with western style instruments or a mixture of traditional and western instruments. the open doors to new investment during his reign have yielded the most access to a coterie of cronies of his and his wife, bun rany", according to megha bahree, a writer on forbes. khmer traditional social dances are analogous to those of other southeast asian nations. excavations in its lower layers produced a series of radiocarbon dates around 6000 bc. to the north the cambodian plain abuts a sandstone escarpment, which forms a southward-facing cliff stretching more than 200 miles from west to east and rising abruptly above the plain to heights of 600 to 1,800 feet. the indigenous ethnic groups of the mountains are known collectively as montagnards or khmer loeu, a term meaning "highland khmer". the empire's centre of power was angkor, where a series of capitals were constructed during the empire's zenith. s. between 1874 and 1962, the total population increased from about 946,000 to 5. some of the fish can be made into prahok for longer storage. social dances are those performed by guests at banquets, parties or other informal social gatherings. one of the largest challenges facing cambodia is still the fact that the older population often lacks education, particularly in the countryside, which suffers from a lack of basic infrastructure. donors pledged $504 million to the country in 2004, while the asian development bank alone has provided $850 million in loans, grants, and technical assistance. norodom sihamoni was crowned cambodia's king in 2004 after his father sihanouk's abdication. between 2010 and 2012 the number of regulated banks and micro-finance institutions increased from 31 covered entities to over 70 individual institutions underlining the growth within the cambodian banking and finance sector. in 2010–2015, the annual rate of deforestation was 1. the country has also significantly invested in vocational education, especially in rural areas, to tackle poverty and unemployment. the directive cited the fact that "some foreigners have used this form of gambling to cheat victims inside and outside the country" as justifying the new policy. health care is offered by both public and private practitioners and research has found that trust in health providers is a key factor in improving the uptake of health care services in rural cambodia. climate köppen climate classification map of cambodia cambodia's climate, like that of the rest of southeast asia, is dominated by monsoons, which are known as tropical wet and dry because of the distinctly marked seasonal differences. please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. foreign relations main article: foreign relations of cambodia then-prime minister hun sen meets with us president joe biden during the asean summit held in phnom penh, 12 november 2022. he has been accused of crackdowns on opponents and critics. it is among the most vulnerable countries to climate change. geography main article: geography of cambodia geographic map of cambodia regional map of cambodia cambodia has an area of 181,035 square kilometres and lies entirely within the tropics, between latitudes 10° and 15°n, and longitudes 102° and 108°e. colloquially, cambodians refer to their country as either srok khmer , or the slightly more formal ប្រទេសកម្ពុជា. religion pchum ben, also known as "ancestors day", is an important religious festival celebrated by khmer buddhists. cambodia's economy grew rapidly in the 2000s and 2010s, and it received considerable investment and infrastructure development support from china as part of its belt and road initiative. in cambodia forest cover is around 46% of the total land area, equivalent to 8,068,370 hectares of forest in 2020, down from 11,004,790 hectares in 1990. its arms came from vietnam and the soviet union. ethnic groups further information: ethnic groups in cambodia an ethnic map of cambodia the vast majority of cambodia's population is of ethnic khmer origin who are speakers of the khmer language, the country's sole official language. the australian hip hop group astronomy class has recorded with kak channthy, a native-born cambodian female singer. in 1997, fearing the growing power of his co-prime minister, prince norodom ranariddh, hun launched a coup, using the army to purge ranariddh and his supporters. religious institutions were targeted by the khmer rouge. in southwestern cambodia two distinct upland blocks, the krâvanh mountains and the dâmrei mountains, form another highland region that covers much of the land area between the tonle sap and the gulf of thailand. the 1997 coup d'état consolidated power under prime minister hun sen and the cambodian people's party. when sung by a duo, the man and women take turns, "answering" the other's verse or posing riddles for the other to solve, with short instrumental breaks in between verses. the programme engages with workers, employers, and governments to improve working conditions and boost the competitiveness of the garment industry. much of this biodiversity is contained around the tonle sap lake and the surrounding biosphere. cambodia was once one of the most landmined countries in the world. beans are traditionally roasted with butter and sugar, plus various other ingredients that might include anything from rum to pork fat, giving the beverage a strange, sometimes faintly chocolatey aroma. in 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 7,464,400 hectares and planted forest covered 603,970 hectares. cambodian buddhism is deeply influenced by hinduism and native animism. most of the territory belongs to cambodia, but a combination of thailand disrespecting international law, thai troops upbuild in the area and lack of resources for the cambodian military have left the situation unsettled since 1962. 5% of the population was literate. the concerns about cambodia's new law are shared not only by labour and rights groups but international organisations more generally. it also had a severe economic impact, with the tourism industry particularly affected due to international travel restrictions. the stability established following the conflict was shaken in 1997 by a coup d'état led by the co-prime minister hun sen, who ousted ranariddh and other parties represented in the government and consolidated power for cpp. despite minimising the disease's spread for much of 2020 the country's health system was put under strain by a major outbreak in early 2021, which prompted several lockdowns. islam is followed by about 2% of the population and comes in three varieties, two practised by the cham people and a third by the descendants of malays, resident in the country for generations. prostitution is illegal in cambodia but yet appears to be prevalent. the dry season lasts from november to april when temperatures can rise up to 40 °c around april. since the 2017 crackdowns on political dissent and free press, cambodia has been described as a de facto one-party state. in the 2010s, the cambodian government and educational system has increased its involvement and co-operation with both national and international environmental groups. vietnamese occupation and transition main articles: people's republic of kampuchea and cambodian–vietnamese war in november 1978, vietnamese troops invaded cambodia in response to border raids by the khmer rouge and conquered it. the protectorate of france period lasted until 1953, with a brief interruption during while the kingdom was occupied by the japanese empire from 1941 to 1945 and simultaneously existing as the puppet state of kingdom of kampuchea in 1945. in 1997, it was successfully nominated as a unesco biosphere reserve. the supply of fish and fish products for food and trade as of 2000 was 20 kilograms per person or 2 ounces per day per person. cyclos are unique to cambodia in that the cyclist sits behind the passenger seat. modern western popular dances including cha-cha, bolero, and the madison, have also influenced cambodian social dance. the districts and municipalities in turn are further divided into communes and quarters. since 1993, there has been a growing use of english, which has been replacing french as the main foreign language. kingdom main article: kingdom of cambodia norodom sihanouk and mao zedong in 1956 in 1955, sihanouk abdicated in favour of his father to participate in politics and was elected prime minister. the khmer empire was southeast asia's largest empire during the 12th century. they are descended from neolithic migrations of mon–khmer speakers via southern china and austronesian speakers from insular southeast asia. traditionally, the khmer people have a recorded information on tra leaves. the cham in cambodia number under a million and often maintain separate villages in the southeast of the country. most main roads are now paved. the attack against the president of the overseas press club of cambodia, rick valenzuela, was captured on video. the government plans to increase the quality of healthcare in the country by raising awareness of hiv/aids, malaria, and other diseases. the 1980s and 1990s also saw the rise in popularity of kantrum, a music style of the khmer surin set to modern instrumentation. the cham are descended from the austronesian people of champa, a former kingdom on the coast of central and southern present-day vietnam and former rival to the khmer empire. french, once the language of government in indochina, is still spoken by many older cambodians, and is also the language of instruction in some schools and universities that are funded by the government of france. in december 2021, hun sen announced his support for his son hun manet to succeed him after the next general election in 2023. kaplan, "eyeglasses were as deadly as the yellow star" as they were seen as a sign of intellectualism. after the 1962 population census was conducted, cambodia's civil conflicts and instability lead to a 36-year-long gap before the country could have another official census in 1998. 6:1. in 2004, inflation was at 1. in a series of 1993 interviews of women about prostitution, three quarters of the interviewees found being a prostitute to be a norm and a profession they felt was not shameful having. lemon tea te kdau kroch chhma, made with chinese red-dust tea and lemon juice, is refreshing both hot and iced and is generally served with a hefty dose of sugar. cambodian french, a remnant of the country's colonial past, is a dialect found in cambodia and is sometimes used in government, particularly in court. plans for hydroelectric development in the greater mekong subregion, by laos in particular, pose a "real danger to the food supply of vietnam and cambodia. the provinces are subdivided into 159 districts and 26 municipalities. anti-government protests supporting opposition party cnrp followed the 2013 general election. 0 children. sihamoni's selection was endorsed by prime minister hun sen and national assembly speaker prince norodom ranariddh , both members of the throne council. favouritism by government officials and impunity is commonplace. the violence came amid political tensions as the opposition boycotted the opening of parliament due to concerns about electoral fraud. cambodian red curry is also eaten with rice and rice vermicelli noodles. in this remote and largely uninhabited area, phnom aural, cambodia's highest peak rises to an elevation of 5,949 feet. every year, cambodians visit pagodas across the country to mark the pchum ben. cambodia's extensive inland waterways were important historically in international trade. elements of other religious practices, such as the veneration of folk heroes and ancestors, confucianism, and taoism mix with chinese buddhism are also practised. khmer rouge regime main articles: democratic kampuchea and khmer rouge rooms of the tuol sleng genocide museum contain thousands of photos taken by the khmer rouge of their victims. the un was given a mandate to enforce a ceasefire and deal with refugees and disarmament known as the united nations transitional authority in cambodia. being isolated in the highlands, the various khmer loeu groups were not indianized like their khmer cousins and consequently are culturally distant from modern khmers and often from each other, observing many pre-indian-contact customs and beliefs. cambodia is a member of la francophonie. held at the end of the rainy season when the mekong river begins to sink back to its normal levels allowing the tonle sap river to reverse flow, approximately 10% of cambodia's population attends this event each year to play games, give thanks to the moon, watch fireworks, dine, and attend the boat race in a carnival-type atmosphere. hun sen and his government have seen much controversy. biodiversity and conservation main article: wildlife of cambodia see also: list of protected areas of cambodia macaques at phnom pros, kampong cham province cambodia's biodiversity is largely founded on its seasonal tropical forests, containing some 180 recorded tree species, and riparian ecosystems. it was fully beholden to the occupying vietnamese army and under the direction of the vietnamese ambassador to phnom penh. most rural households depend on agriculture and its related sub-sectors. sihanouk allowed the vietnamese communists to use cambodia as a sanctuary and a supply route for their arms and other aid to their armed forces fighting in south vietnam. east of the mekong the transitional plains gradually merge with the eastern highlands, a region of forested mountains and high plateaus that extend into laos and vietnam. in 2012, credit bureau cambodia was established with direct regulatory oversight by the national bank of cambodia. because cambodia is a member of asean, and because under asean rules "the objections of one member can thwart any group initiative", cambodia is diplomatically useful to china as a counterweight to southeast asian nations that have closer ties to the united states. amnesty international currently recognises one prisoner of conscience in the country: 33-year-old land rights activist yorm bopha. scholar george coedes refers to a 10th-century inscription of a cambodian dynastic legend in which the hermit kambu swayambhuva and the celestial nymph mera unite and establish the cambodian solar royal dynasty , that begins with the chenla ruler srutavarman and his son sreshthavarman. it encompasses the lake and nine provinces: kampong thom, siem reap, battambang, pursat, kampong chhnang, banteay meanchey, pailin, oddar meanchey and preah vihear. judges and lawyers were executed after being deemed "class enemies" and only 6–12 legal professionals actually survived and remained in the country. phnom penh airport shuttle train cambodia's road traffic accident rate is high by world standards. corruption affects the judiciary, the police, and other state institutions. 7 million. the protests ended after a crackdown by government forces. since 2007, less than 3,220 km2 of primary forest remain with the result that the future sustainability of the forest reserves of cambodia is under severe threat. his government was regularly accused of ignoring human rights and suppressing political dissent. examples of areas where cambodians encounter corrupt practices in their everyday lives include obtaining medical services, dealing with alleged traffic violations, and pursuing fair court verdicts. the deforestation involves the local population, cambodian businesses and authorities as well as transnational corporations from all over the world. corruption further information: corruption in cambodia the level of corruption in cambodia exceeds most countries in the world. the cuisine of cambodia contains tropical fruits, soups and noodles. for most cambodians, it is a time to remember their relatives who died during the 1975–1979 khmer rouge regime. this policy was followed by the country's first national science and technology master plan 2014–2020. to use air strikes in cambodia, and on 26 march he said "these criminal attacks must immediately and definitively stop". textiles the garment industry represents the largest portion of cambodia's manufacturing sector, accounting for 80% of the country's exports. the principal commercial crop is rubber. its credentials were recognised by the united nations. cambodia is divided into 25 provinces including the autonomous municipality. legislative powers are shared by the executive and the bicameral parliament of cambodia , which consists of a lower house, the national assembly and an upper house, the senate. agriculture further information: agriculture in cambodia agriculture is the mainstay of the cambodian economy. total cambodian military spending stands at 3% of national gdp. the close interrelationship between spirits and the community, the efficacy of apotropaic and luck-attracting actions and charms, and the possibility of manipulating one's life through contact with spiritual entities such as the "baromey" spirits originates from the native folk religion. women in urban areas have 2. there are 212 mammal species, 536 bird species, 240 reptile species, 850 freshwater fish species , and 435 marine fish species recorded by science. the international rice research institute reintroduced more than 750 traditional rice varieties to cambodia from its rice seed bank in the philippines. the government is a constitutional monarchy operated as a parliamentary representative democracy.